---
title: What defines a protocol?
# excerpt: The definition, building blocks and considerations for a software protocol
date: 2024-01-02
order: 1
draft: true
tags: ['software', 'api', 'system-design']
---

The design of complex data-oriented software architectures often requires the development of protocols. But a common misconception is that these protocols can be defined in isolation, without considering the bigger picture goals of the 
overarching architecture. It's useful to define a protocol a bit more systematically to gain a structured idea of what we're dealing with. Of course, protocols aren't limited to software - humans have protocols for all kinds of scenarios too. Perhaps taking an analogy can help us clarify this better? 

<!--more-->

Let us take the example of a barista in a cafe and a potential customer. A customer walks in, joins a queue. Once they reach the head of the queue, they get to request a particular beverage from the barista, and pay for it, following which they either join a line (synchronously) or wait independently (asynchronously) for their beverage to be prepared and their name/order number called out. A mermaid diagram clarifies this nicely.

<mermaid>
sequenceDiagram
    Customer->>Barista: A capuccino please.
    Barista->>Customer: Size?
    Customer->>Barista: something small is fine
    Barista->>Customer: We don't have a <br/>small, only a venti
    Customer->>Barista: ...what?    
</mermaid>

Not the most ideal flow, but of course, human communication is filled with nuance.

## Components

Alright, but just to get back from our analogy to software, a protocol can be considered to be a combination of 3 distinct components (2 of which are crucial, one being context-dependent): Interfaces, Message models and States.

### Interfaces

Interfaces are the endpoints accepting the message. When a message is sent to someone, that message is received by that someone. In software, that could be a networking socket, or something like RPC or TCP/UCP or a HTTP verb. Of course, for a protocol, a definition is useful

<mermaid>
sequenceDiagram
    participant ...
    participant Customer
    participant Barista
    Customer->>...: A capuccino please.
    ...->>Customer: Why are you asking me? I'm clearly sitting at a table.
    Barista->>Customer: Excuse me, the line's over here, please stop bothering the customers.
</mermaid>

### Message models

Once you know where to send messages, both of you need to know what to send. These take the form of templates, vocabularies or ontologies - perhaps in JSON-Schema or XML-Schema. But the core aspect is that this is agreed/understood by both stakeholders.

<mermaid>
sequenceDiagram
    Customer->>Barista: I need a medium
    Barista->>Customer: We only have grande or tall
    Customer->>Barista: Which one is medium?
    Barista->>Customer: Neither, there's no medium
    Customer->>Barista: There's no concept of a size between the smallest and the largest?
    Barista->>Customer: <br/> there's two choices in between <br/>and you're holding up the line now
</mermaid>

### State

Not all protocols need to be stateful - some protocols are stateless. But it is quite possible that a shared memory of a transaction is understood. Lots of protocols come with an understanding of states, or sessions.

<mermaid>
sequenceDiagram
    Customer->>Barista: Alright, fine, a Venti.
    Barista->>Customer: Name?
    Customer->>+Barista: John
    Barista->>-Customer: <br/><br/><br/>Venti for Jen? Jen? <br/> Nobody named Jen?
</mermaid>

Of course, a state could be a short-lived session - you don't come in 3 days later for your coffee. Or it could be long-lasting and immutable (some of the best systems are immutable and keep track of changes and reverts instead) - the money you pay is more permanently transferred to the account of the cafe.

## Conclusion

This is a simple and humorous definition of a protocol, and has no technical details whatsoever. There are numerous other considerations for what a protocol can contain, and consist of, with respect to modalities, bottlenecks and other kinds of caches and features. Future blogs will make use of this simple structure to define protocols for all kinds of architectures!
